Okay, so we will have Danielle Campbell will be first
up. Is it? Yes,
That is me.
Hello. Hello. Thank you so much for having me.
Good day, Danielle. So you've got five minutes.
You sent Five minutes is up to you. Okay.
So I'll leave that in your, in your hands.
Can I do a TikTok dance? No, I'm kidding. Okay, cool.
So my name is Dee, and I am a vet nurse.
And I was going to use this five minutes to start off
with a quote and then talk a little bit
about my own experience.
And then if we have time at the end,
just go over some questions, if anyone has any.
So the quote begins, A humane
and painless end, A small price, happily paid
for a life well lived, an arrangement of mutual benefit
hidden by this narrative, out of sight, out of mind.
Animals cease to be individuals like the pets we have at
home, most known only as livestock, faceless units
of production in a system of incomprehensible scale,
exempt from the cruelty laws
that protect our companion animals.
They're suffering unseen and unheard.
They're value determined only by their usefulness to mankind
rationalized in the belief of our own superiority.
So that's the quote. And that is from Dominion,
which is a documentary on YouTube well worth a watch
and my own experience.
So I have spent my life with animals.
I grew up on a lifestyle block,
and of course now I'm a vet nurse,
and I have a really small animal sanctuary,
which I absolutely love,
and I've got lots of disabled animals.
It's really beautiful. And through my experience,
I have grown to understand what makes us similar to animals
and what makes us different.
And some of the similarities
that we share is we both have the same love for our freedom.
And we both have the same pain signals that go
to our brain when we are being hurt.
And we have the same maternal hormones when we give birth
that make us love and want to care for our young.
And we're just both sentient beings that have the ability to
perceive the world around us and feel happiness and sadness.
And of course, we have lots of differences,
both having gifts and abilities that the other doesn't.
And over history, humans have used this idea of difference
to label a group of individuals as less intelligent than us.
And then we've kind of used that to justify
overpowering them and enslaving them to serve us.
And whether we've been doing that to humans
or to animals, as we have developed consciously
and are now made aware of the atrocity that is occurring
and has occurred repeatedly throughout history,
surely we are now at a point where we are aware enough
to realize that this is no longer acceptable.
Society is formed in such a way
that not all people have the opportunity to be leaders.
And although we are all accountable for caring
for other life forms that cannot speak
or help themselves, you especially have the ability
to make changes that better life
and create less suffering for these sentient beings.
And then I just wanted to leave with a question.
So if you were a mother,
or if someone that you really cared about was heavily
pregnant and in a prison so small, they were unable to turn
around and could only take a few steps forward
and a few steps back for weeks on end,
they are unable to exercise.
So their muscles weakened to the point
where they can't stand up,
and you develop pressure sores from the floors
and lying in your own waist.
And once you give birth,
you watch your children being mutilated by workers
with no pain relief or anesthetic.
And if you were in those shoes, wouldn't you want people
to stand up and make decisions that better your wellbeing?
Thank you very much.
Thanks Danielle. Right, we'll go
to Steve. Who has a question?
Hello, Steve. Thank you very much, Steve.
And, uh, the answer to that question is yes.
And, um, I, I, I wonder,
um, what is your perception of what
the extent of stress would be
for a large intelligent mammal like a mother pig,
uh, not being able to express their profound nest building
instincts because they're in a cage where they can't turn
around and have you any sort of direct experience of that
with other animals or even with pigs?
I haven't personally worked with pigs,
but I have seen, um, I've seen a lot of animals
that are stressed when they're in crates,
and lots of them are just sort
of like recovering from surgery.
So after three days, they start
to do like circling behaviors.
Um, some, some animals are just more relaxed than others.
I mean, even for ourselves, if we take a flight for 12 hours
and we have to sit in a chair, sorry,
I'm looking at the wrong screen.
Um, and we have to sit in a chair.
I mean, it becomes uncomfortable really quickly.
And you can imagine the discomfort of weeks
in in those conditions.
And you know, when I,
when I watch my own animals here on the sanctuary,
freeing the paddock
and the cats running around, you know,
you, we are all human.
We, we know when they're happy and when they're sad.
So yeah, it's, it's the, the amount
of stress would be a 10 out of 10 for, for that sort
of confinement and being pregnant.
I mean, I, I personally don't have children,
but I know for women, their hormones are crazy.
And, you know, we, we are similar in that, in that sense,
which is what we've studied through the,
through nursing. So yeah.
Thanks very much Nicole.
Uh, uh, Danielle, we've come to, uh, time unfortunately,
and thanks very much for taking the effort
to give an oral submission and a written submission.
We really appreciate it.
Thank you so much, guys. You take care. Cheers too, Luke.
See ya.
Right. Um, next we have Joe Rogers.
So is that in person, um, Clark,
or is that by, um, zoom
Coming online?
Online. Right. Brilliant.
Joe, welcome to the primary production Select committee.
Um, uh, thanks for taking the time
to make a submission today.
You have, uh, five minutes.
What you do with the time is yours,
but if you'd like questions, I advise you to, um,
leave a bit of time at the end for that.
So the floor is yours.
Thank you. Um, yeah, I'd just like to add
to my written proposal.
Um, I'm just really concerned
that the industry was given five years to phase out the use
of ferrying stools.
And when we get close to this, it's now being promoted,
proposed to give another 10 years.
So 15 years to change practice is just prolonging suffering.
Um, it's a bit of a slap in the face of authority
and animal welfare.
Um, I'm concerned
that the bill denies the pigs the right to a decent life.
I eat meat. I've got stock on my land
that do go for slaughter.
I'm not adverse to raising animals for food,
but I do believe that, um, they deserve
to live a dignified life, healthy and body of mind.
And, um, I, so I object
to them suffering in any unnecessary way up to that point.
Uh, the New Amendment bill seems
to backtrack from the decision made from the high court in
2020 that they should be banned.
Um, I appreciate that some containment
for artificial insemination,
but, um, that only needs to be
for a very short amount of time.
You know, hours, you know, minutes.
But to birth and feed piglets, there's just no need.
There's no way these sounds need to can perform them.
Are the lead duties squashed into a pen?
Uh, when she's got suitable room to turn around
and care for piglets, it would be much more successful.
Um, having, having had two children,
I certainly wouldn't appreciate doing that, trying to look
after them strapped into a tiny chair.
Um, so I'm sure they feel much the same.
Um, taking advice like reading about the,
on the Veterinary Association website,
that pigs work best in their stable family environments, um,
not moving or disrupting them regularly.
So it makes sense to keep them together,
keeping their social structure together, um, which is like
what I've witnessed with sheep,
really the older generation looking
after the younger giving birth and adding that support
and space for bonding.
Um, so yeah, I just think they would work better, um,
raised in, in small, you know, in small groups
where they can live their natural life
and they would probably lead a need a lot less interference
from us being able to be raised that way.
Um, it's prolonging the terrible treatment for pigs
and not doing much to promote clean green New Zealand, um,
animal loving country.
Um, so to promote a, a brand consumers want,
um, you know, good PR
and, um, the government needs to support that solid practice
of, of eating meat that's been well raised,
um, with kindness.
Um, it seems like quite a lot of the firms can raise
pigs without these pens and are able to do so.
Um, so it seems a very archaic
and necessary way to produce pork.
Um, and I think the ban should be upheld.
I think it's a horrible way to treat
another living creature. Thank you.
Thank you, Joe. Um, do we have any questions, panelists?
I've got a quick one miles Where you go, Steve.
Yeah, so you, you made a point at the start,
which I think is useful because there's been some accusation
from sun pork that, um,
this concern about animal welfare is, uh, from people
who just wanna see all animal farming eliminated entirely.
But you are making it clear that you're not opposed
to animal farming, but that if we're gonna farm animals
and, uh, kill 'em for food,
then they should have a good life, at least to the point
where, um, they are, uh, killed, slaughtered.
Um, and I think it's useful, you've made that point.
I wonder what you think the good is
for our overall reputation
as a food producer if we move away from the trajectory
of getting mother pigs out of cages.
So just to clarify, just to say, um,
what good would it do to remove the cages
for public relations?
Yeah, I'm saying if we, if we, um,
well, you could take it either way.
Would it be good for our reputation to get rid of the cages
or is it bad for our reputation to keep them in place
as a status quo for another 10 years?
Uh, yeah, definitely both.
Um, I think New Zealand should really pride itself
on raising animals that live outside eating grass
and doing what they're supposed to be doing.
Um, yeah, I just like,
I take pride in the fact that we raise happy animals
that we can be amongst happy with us
and go off with great, um, excellent quality
and, um, that they've had a great time
with their friends doing what they should be doing until,
you know, until that point.
So I think it is a very much, um,
part of New Zealand image to the world is that that is how
we are supposed to be looking after our animals.
Our perception, the perception is
Thanks very much Joe.
We've come to over time actually really appreciate,
appreciate the, um, submission
and, um, have a, um, good rest of your day.
Thank you. And you Take care.
And you Right now we have
Lorraine sells or sells, I'm not sure.
Cel ses Ses. Right.
Good day, Lorraine, welcome
to the primary production Select committee.
Um, you have five minutes for your submission today
and um, I'll leave it in your hands.
Uh, okay. I've got nothing written down today,
but what I did do, um, um, last week was,
I think it was last week or maybe a couple of days ago,
was sent some photographs of this system that you're trying
to ban, um, which is adjacent to my property here.
Um, the stench that comes out is, is horrendous
and to it, and the squealing
and the screaming of the, the pigs.
And I took upon myself
to actually enter the property next door,
which has this system
and was appalled at the conditions that they are kept in.
Mm-hmm. Um, several pigs actually growing.
They grow in those pens.
They, it is not just the same, you know,
the the mothers being next to 'em initially,
but once they come off the mother,
they actually stay in those pens for their entire life
until they go to, onto the truck
to be dispatched to slaughter.
Um, and as we all know, I've got horses, you know,
I've had my parents farmers in the uk.
I've had pigs lit, lived next door to me in the uk.
And never ever have I incurred or seen
or heard any, what I've been seeing the last three years
with this pig farm next door to me.
Um, pigs are exceedingly intelligent.
Um, they're exceedingly clean animals,
and yet these animals are in concrete pens
with no way of lying down, no bedding, no nothing.
They're lying in their own experiment.
They get washed down twice a day in the morning
and in the evening, and they've got a drip feed,
they get fed twice a day.
Uh, it's no way to keep any animal, let alone one
that actually is ending gonna end up on the table one day.
Um, we banned battery hens.
Uh, I also own chickens, and I can assure you,
and I've owned pigs before, that chickens are nowhere near
as intelligent as pigs,
yet we banned chickens from being locked up in cages.
Why are we not banning pigs from being locked up in cages?
Um, there were hundreds in those photographs I sent.
There are hundreds of pigs in tiny cages, you know,
6, 7, 8 at a time in something that they can't move around.
They can't socialize properly, they can't play,
they can't do any of the things that
a normal animal should be able to do.
Um, it is, um, it is pretty disgusting
that in New Zealand of all places that kind of, you know,
have this reputation of doing things right compared
to some other countries in the world
that pigs are actually being kept in these conditions.
And I think that if anybody buying pig from the supermarket
saw what these pigs are being, uh,
the conditions are being kept in,
would actually probably not ever buy pork ever again.
So I think that, you know, they are animals.
They deserve respect.
They deserve to have their, their babies and look
after them, nurture them as any other animal would want to.
And, um, and to be kept to humane.
Um, from my experience in New Zealand living next door
to one, um, that is not the case.
And I've actually even reported this to, uh,
two primary food, the, the primary industries.
Um, I dunno whether lip service has been taken,
but, um, something needs to be done about it
because in my opinion it's cruel.
Um, thank you, Lorraine.
I think you might have incriminated yourself, uh,
around trespass there, but, um,
Oh yeah, yeah, they, they, they did
actually accuse me of that.
But the gate was open.
I drove in to find the farmer
to find out why there was such a stench
and why there was such a noise and, uh, and he wasn't there.
And so I put my head in the sheds,
and this is where I, um, this is
where I discovered the absolute atrocities of, of
what is happening here on our doorstep.
I think, uh, ley has a question for you.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Uh, no.
Um, essentially I just want
to confirm whether you had permission
to get in or not. And I guess that
Was already on No, no, no, no, no, I didn't.
I'm a, I'm a, I'm a neighbor that has to put up
with the screaming, the smell, the stench
e cans have been involved
and have, um, done something about the storage
of manure on the site.
And it has to go flow into underground things,
and they have to empty it more often.
But, um, I didn't think that anything so
horrendous as to the way that these, these,
these pigs are being kept could actually even happen this
day and age, let alone in New Zealand.
So yes, I did trespass and yes, he did say that.
Yeah, I you trespass, but at the end of the day it was open.
I was looking for him and, um,
and, um, and, and he wasn't there.
So,
Um, Does, it doesn't mean it's right. He
Should. Sorry, Lorraine,
we, we've come, we've come to time.
Um, sometimes when,
uh, yeah, you dig in a hole you want to stop sometimes,
maybe, um, point water.
Mr. I, I appreciate
Brief point of water, Mr. Chair.
Yes. I, I, I have, I can give us a little bit
of advice on trespass
'cause I've been, uh, accused of trespass myself.
Um, and once you've been advised that you are not permitted
to be on a private property, um, then you are trespassing,
but up to the point where you've been advised
that you're not.
So that's why you can walk up to your neighbor's front door
and knock on the door and not be trespassing.
So, um, I think your initial instinct to go across
and talk to the farmer and then you found them not there,
and you looked inside, I don't think you were trespassing at
that point, but once they say you are not welcome there
and it's private property, then you technically, um,
could be liable for trespass.
That's just a point of clarification on
my understanding of the law.
Yeah. Take it from the horse's mouth.
Hey, uh, thank you very much, Lorraine. Um,
Do look at those photos.
Yep. Thanks for the, both the oral
and the written submission.
We appreciate it. It's not easy, um, to thank you, uh,
be a submitter in these, uh, cases.
And, uh, well, in any case,
Strong testimony. Thanks.
Thanks for your time today. Right.
We are now moving on to
Sanna Von Kestenberg.
Good afternoon, Sanna.
Welcome to the primary production select
committee. Um, oh, hi.
Hi. Yeah. Um,
You, you are scheduled for five minutes. How you
I don't even, I'm Gonna take the whole five minutes,
So, um, far away.
Cool. Um, so I haven't really got a massively strong
argument, like a personal experience.
Like I kind of called the tail end of that lady.
Um, but I guess I was just wanting to urge the select,
you know, committee people to really weigh up, um, you know,
the animal welfare versus, um, well,
I know there's strong argument to create them
and I think New Zealand was actually pioneering in the
creating of, um, I believe of, um, of creating pigs.
And I know that we have reduced the time, uh, with, uh,
you know, with the, with the end game
of hopefully getting rid of them.
And I know there are countries that don't farrow, you know,
create them for that.
I think we do, is it five weeks at the moment,
like when they're pregnant
and then when they've given birth?
Is that correct? Yep.
So, and I know that it's, you know, the main argument is
that it saves them, saves piglets,
and obviously we wanna have more
piglets because it's more money.
It's about pr, you know, having a higher rate of, um,
production of pork.
Um, and, you know, 'cause I kind of feel like they're kind
of, you know, using that argument that it's a,
it's a welfare thing, but it seems a bit odd
because we kill calfs.
You know, we actually killed the
calfs when that for the milk.
So it's kind of an odd argument to kinda go, oh,
it saves the piglets when we, we
actively slaughter young calfs.
So for me, that's the, the argument gets kind of negated.
Um, so really it's about the welfare of the, uh, mother,
the cell, the mother pig, whatever.
So, um, I guess it's about what kind of,
and I also know we ex we import pork
without any standards.
Like we don't have any welfare standards, I believe.
Correct me if I'm wrong. So that's great, I guess.
Yeah, so it's really kind of about,
and it's a small, I believe it's a small industry.
We, we import most of our bacon, I believe, um,
or most of our pork.
Um, so I guess it's really about overall what,
what do we want as a country for the welfare
of our animals, you know?
Um, I can't help,
but, you know, I guess I'm linking it
as an animal welfare thing.
I'm sort of thinking also outside the box, you know, we've,
we've just, um, sold off heaps of fonterra
and I'm wondering is that a, a
'cause you know, maybe people are getting more aware
of animal welfare and, and,
and being, being more conscious about, uh, what we buy.
I've heard the argument, most people don't care,
but I think, and we should be able to vote with our wallet.
But as New Zealanders, it's really about, you know,
how do we feel about the welfare of animals
and what can we do about our animals, you know,
and how we, how we, um, you know, look after them, I guess.
So I can't speak personally, I haven't seen them.
I probably, um, wouldn't approve if I, you know,
from what that lady just said, um, I, you know,
I haven't seen it in real life,
but for me, you know, as our a hundred percent, you know,
pure green, um, kiwi, you know, like New Zealand, um,
image, um, you know, is
that gonna be reflected if we extend this, um, you know,
this practice any longer?
'cause eventually, um, you know, I think it will,
it will need to get phased out and the, the, the
otherwise it's gonna go the other way in my opinion.
Yeah.
Thank you Sanna.
Um, does any of the panelists have questions?
No, it's a clear, strong submission.
No, that was good. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much
for your time today, Rosanna.
Um, I wish you a good rest of your day.
So we will now move on to our next submitter,
which I believe is Michael Morris.
And we have from Animal Justice Auckland.
And we have Michael for 10 minutes.
Excuse me, Mr. Chair. I think we have Kay Jones first.
Oh, sorry. Yeah, quite right. And she's on. Good on you.
I'm someone's on the case. So we have Kay Jones first.
So, um, we have Kay for five minutes.
Um, welcome, Kay to the primary production select committee.
I really appreciate you making the time to,
uh, put in a submission.
Unfortunately, it's, um, recess week
and we're spread to the seven four wins, I suppose.
Um, however, you have five minutes
and the floor is yours.
You and thank you for this opportunity to speak.
Um, my written submission was very brief due
to time constraints.
So in addition to that, I've sent in an article, um,
which I understand the technical advisors
to the committee may also have seen, which is summarizing
the, um, issues identical to those facing New Zealand.
Um, but in the EU
where they're looking at the technical issues for,
for the EU associated with replacing Faren Kates crates
for sows, and looking at harmonized legislation
that would contribute to international standards.
Because as you understand, the EU is, um, an exporting, um,
sector for pork.
Now, I said in my brief submission that I opposed the bill,
but that being said, there are many bills
that I oppose that go through.
So I, in listening to all of the submissions
that we've had online over the last two days,
I've been looking at the balance that, um,
we are seeking to get between the issues relating
to the welfare of sows and the welfare of piglets,
and also about the transition period so
that if the long term aim is to have more free farrowing,
then that's, um, fine,
but in the meantime, what's the certainty for farmers
that we can be helping to provide them with?
Now I'm not a farmer, but my uncle was
for 40 years a senior advisor with Ministry for Agriculture,
and I heard from him in detail about the work he did
with farmers trying to help them have best practice
and taking in feedback
and always looking at better research to, um,
try and, and make sure that outer our New Zealand
is not only following best practice
for our brand New Zealand reputation,
but also for the surety of domestic market.
So that supplementary, um, submission that, um,
refers to, instead of having farrowing crates, moving
to farrowing pens with a slightly larger footprint
so that there's room for the SOW to move around,
but there's also protection for, um,
the piglets in a creep space so
that they're less at risk of being crushed.
And rather than having a very complicated formula,
which I have to say, I, I'm, I'm, I'm a former math teacher,
but I found it difficult to translate to, to
what it would look like.
Um, but farmers, you know,
small farmers will find it a lot easier
to be able to measure something.
So 6.5 square meters
for a temporary farrowing pen is a lot easier
to understand than a formula that relates to the size
of an individual sow and will change for every.
So, um, so I would sort of certainly recommend having
standards that are clear
and easy to understand now, as well as, um,
talking about what the technical information is,
I think it's really helpful to contextualize this within
the image of Uriah as an exporting nation, not just
for one, I mean, we don't export much pig hog,
but we could to boutique purchases.
We certainly have a domestic market
and I buy pork meat,
but I buy brands that I feel safer
with their ethical standards like Freedom Farms, which are,
but anyway, that's part
of looking at the domestic market and what people want.
But when we are looking at the broader agriculture sector,
we do rely on having a good reputation for
how we treat our animals
and what the standards are that we are working to, like
Fonterra having sold off its commercial, um,
or in the process of selling off its consumer brands,
that price is partly on the basis of it being a good product
and it's to meet an international standard.
So we need to be looking at
what the international standards are for any of these, um,
behaviors, whether it's how we treat our pigs
or anything else in the agriculture.
The more New Zealand gets seen
as being cruel rather than kind
or principled, the worse it's likely to be
for our overall economic position.
So I would really argue for looking at
perhaps even if the legislation has to go through to make it
more balanced by going for the farrowing pen
or farrowing crate.
And I'll leave it there in case there's questions.
So I, I could talk more, but five minutes.
Thank you. Thank you, Kay.
You've, um, articulated, uh, your point very well
or points very well and,
and I appreciate that we have come to overtime actually.
So, um, there won't be time for any questions unfortunately.
But thank you very much for putting in, um, submissions.
Um, really appreciate that.
Thank you. Very useful. Thank you.
Right now we've got, uh, Dr. Michael Morris.
Uh, good day.
Uh, Michael, welcome to the, uh,
primary production select committee.
We have you for 10 minutes today.
Um, what you do with your time's up to you.
I would suggest you leave a bit of time at the end
for questions if you want questions.
And the floor is yours.
Okay. Um, thank you for, uh, meeting with me today.
I will take my submission as read.
Um, most of you are pretty good at reading submissions,
but, um, a few things I wanted to highlight is, um,
animals are sentient
and that is not the view of mad, uh, wide-eyed vegans.
That is the New Zealand legislation.
It's in the long title of the Animal Welfare Act.
If they're sentient, then there is no moral justification
for treating them any differently from any other sentient
beings, such as dogs or humans.
Now, this government,
and it's actually quite surprised me
that they were showing a burst of compassion, have decided
to ban greyhound racing, which is great
because they recognize that dogs are intelligent,
sentient, have a number of emotions
and shouldn't be locked up
and mistreated for trivial purposes of money.
Uh, most uh,
independent intelligence tests have actually found
that pigs are at least as intelligent as dogs,
and some people say more so.
So there's no reason why we should be confining pigs in
spaces too small to turn around
where they are having stereotype behavior.
And what this means is repeated behavior like we see in
intelligent animals swaying in elephants
and biting the bars in pigs
and in humans, that sort of thing blocking backwards
and forwards, which you see in humans under stress
with schizophrenia and autistic people.
And I'm autistic, so I understand
that stereotype behavior very well.
It shouldn't be allowed to go on.
Uh, there's no evidence that, uh, piglets crush their pig,
uh, pig cells crush their piglets.
That's just scientific nonsense.
And if you actually look at scientific research by people
who know what they're doing and know how
to conduct experiments, um, the reason why you're getting,
um, more of them crushed in the outdoors is
because the piglets are sick and curl up close to the mother
and they can't do that.
And the para crates, so they die their disease instead.
But numbers, proportion of mortality is the same, so we can,
um, get rid of that one.
And the other economic argument is
that ts if we treat animals better,
it's gonna cost more for meat.
Well, again, I say that that is a reprehensible argument
because we don't use that argument for things like, um,
humans or even dogs.
We say that regardless
of whether greyhound racing makes money, it should go,
it's also exaggerated.
Um, been plenty of economic studies in journals such as the,
uh, general of environmental and, and,
and agricultural ethics, which show that, um,
is often exaggerated.
And even if you do get a, let's say a 5% rise in the cost
of, uh, production
because, um, they're no longer in fair increase,
that doesn't necessarily mean a 5% rise in the cost of pork
because businesses do not price on the basis of cost plus.
That's economics 1 0 1.
They base they price on the basis of, of supply and demand.
We need to look at, um, factors such
as elasticity of demand.
People might just buy elsewhere so they can't, um,
pass the prices on.
We need to look about things like whether the
producers can sharpen their pencil.
So it's the same mistake
that the government's making over saying
that if we give tax cuts to landlords
and make things cheaper for them,
they're gonna pass the prices on down.
Um, they're not the same
as capital gains tax won't make prices any higher.
So economically it doesn't make sense.
And definitely ethically it doesn't.
So I'll, I'll leave it there.
Right. Thanks for that. Uh, Steve, you have a question?
Yeah. Thank you Michael. Um, you always, uh,
bring strong points to the argument
for better protection of animal welfare.
Um, I wonder where you,
or if you have any opinions on our commitments
to always improving our welfare
and environmental legislation in terms of even, you know,
so things such as the, um, EU trade agreements, um,
and whether this sort
of a move is proposed in this amendment bill, um,
which may in fact breach our animal welfare act even
after the change mm-hmm.
Um, is a risk for our overall reputation
and maybe even for our ability to trade.
Yeah. Um, I prefer to use ethical arguments
because I like to think best of my hu my fellow humans.
And I, I'm hoping that it can be swayed by more
by them than by economics.
But yeah, even on a purely economic basis, the ministry
for the environment, um, you know,
priced our clean green image back in 2001
and found that in terms of increased exports
because people want to, and imports
because people want to go into New Zealand as well
as tourism, um, dairy, agriculture,
it was worth about almost a billion dollars in $2,001.
So it's worth a lot more now.
So yeah, I'd say there are,
there's definitely economic arguments in, um, treating, uh,
animals better, just as there are ethical ones.
Well perhaps if there's time for another one, Mr. Chair.
Yes. Yeah.
And so on that, on that question of the ethics, um,
can you talk to us about how it is that we are better able
to anthropomorphize
or, you know, this almost a pejorative term you might say,
but better able to recognize the sentence of dogs
than we are able to recognize a sentence of pigs?
So as a society,
though there are dogs mistreated in our society too, um,
we seem more willing to tolerate mistreatment of, uh,
a, a mother pig, even though they are in all senses part of
that same mammalian family of intelligent, uh, animals.
Um, not that intelligence is the only me measure
of sentience, um, but they're in the same category.
But we will tolerate mistreatment of pigs more than dogs.
What's your understanding of that?
I think it's just because we are used to seeing dogs
as pets, so that honorary humans, um, not all cultures see
that in Vietnam and in China they still eat
dogs as well as pigs.
Um, another reason might be that dogs are biddable
and pigs are sassy and we generally don't like sassy people
'cause we like people to do as they're told.
So that's kind of the attitude of the animal,
not a reflection on their actual
sentiment or their intelligence. Yeah.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. And,
and finally, in terms of, um, your understanding of
what the experience would be of a mother pig, um,
in the 48 hours before giving birth, um,
and then in the days afterwards, um, what the extent
of the stress would be for them not being able to turn
around or express their nest building, um, instincts
or nurse young in a way that they would naturally,
Um, as I said, uh, I'm autistic myself,
I get in stressful situations, um,
confinement doesn't bother me,
but, uh, noise does for instance.
So I would feel the same way as the pig does.
I want to go like that. These sort of repetitive behavior.
Um, I want to, Mike King found that as well,
and he suffers from depression.
I dunno what it's like, but it must be pretty hideous.
He immediately recognized depression in pigs when he was,
when he was shown the pigs in the cages.
And, um, you know, that
prompted his Damascus moment from being a pork injury stooge
to being an advocate, um, for animals.
So yeah, I,
unless I felt it myself, I can't really understand it.
But, uh, I think yeah, we can have empathy still
A hundred percent. Yeah,
that's, uh, very solidly made point. Thank you.
Uh, thanks Steve. Are there any further questions?
No, seems not.
Look, I'd like to thank you very much for your, uh, written
and oral submission, uh, Michael,
and, um, wish you all the very best.
Okay, thank you. Yeah,
Very good. So
our next submitter is Graham Bull,
and we have Graham for, um, five minutes.
Uh, is that right now?
Okay, good day. Graham, welcome
to the primary production select committee.
You can hear me? I can hear you,
Yeah. Okay then.
Um, thanks for taking the time today.
Um, if you could, uh, you've got five minutes
if you could give your presentation
and if you'd like questions, uh, leave a little bit
of time at the end for those. So,
Okay, I'll start off, I'll start off with the quotation
and then draw some of the stuff that I was talking about,
about ethics, draw that together a bit more.
So this is one that I used in my submission,
but it's a damn good one, really.
And this is George, well from Animal Farm,
and, uh, he's got here animals grouped together.
And some people think that's just symbolic
of humans, which it is.
But also if you go to his life, he says he was inspired
by this, by his witness of cruelty
to animals when he was a boy.
Here it goes. Now, comrades, what is the nature of this?
This is a peg speaking in the book.
What is the nature of this life of ours? Let us face it.
Our lives are miserable. The laborious thought.
We are born, we are given just so much food
as we'll keep the breath in our bodies
and those of us who are capable of of it are forced to work
to the last atom of our strength.
And the very instance that our usefulness has come
to an end, we are slaughtered with hideous cruelty.
And that is, you know, a phrase, uh,
I think is worth meditating on, really.
But, uh, I go into the ethics
and I want to start by looking at an, uh,
u quite often unstated assumption that underpin
defenses a practices like using Pharaoh crates
as an assumption trace to the 17th century philosopher, uh,
bar Spinoza.
He wrote, I do not deny that animals have feelings.
So he wasn't like decart saying they're entirely,
uh, a machine.
Uh, although, you know, that's what Orwell says,
we're being treated like.
I do not deny that they have feelings.
What I deny is that we may not use them as we please
treating them the way which best suits us,
saying we can do that.
Why? Uh, and and his, his reasoning was very simple.
We can do it because it's justified by the power we have.
Ethics to him equals power. It's reduced to preferences.
So some people say, well, I have my preference,
uh, I have a feeling.
But then you could say a producer's economic argument
is just their feeling.
And the stronger feeling backed by greater power should win,
which actually means I would lose.
But still, but this confuses power with morality.
It commits a further fundamental, logical error attempting
to derive an ought.
What should happen from what is the case.
The fact that a practice is profitable
or efficient does not mean it ought to be permitted.
This is the same error that was once used
to justify the subjugation
of humans based on race or gender.
We have rightly rejected it in these domains.
It is time, uh, to do the same for the animals.
The sales struggle against confinement is a biological
and experience reality.
The suffering of a sentient pen is not a preference.
She didn't, uh, you know, want to be there.
It's an objective fact about the world as an is.
The art though comes from our shared commitment
to a basic ethical principle that we recognize is true,
that is wrong to inflict severe,
preventable suffering on a feeling creature.
Now this just isn't my feeling
as a principle already embedded in our
existing animal welfare law.
If we abandon that principle, we abandon the very foundation
of this debate to permit a system built on a systematic
I immobilization of a feeling creature is
to endorse a principle that might make right
and that efficiency trumps compassion.
Uh, nothing about Trump there,
although he may have the same idea.
So I asked this committee
to do more than just hear the evidence.
I asked you to scrutinize the hidden philosophies
with an arguments presented.
I'm asking you to affirm
that our law should not be based on power or preference
or just sentiment,
but on a more robust ethic, one
that recognizes objective facts like suffering
and builds its aughts upon them.
Some beings don't get the chance to do that,
but we're in that unique position where we can do it.
We can do it for them. Why not?
Thank you very much, Graham.
We've come to time and I appreciate, um,
the effort you've put in to your written and
and oral submission.
So thank you very much for that. Um, we'll move on now.
Excellent Graham, have a good day.
Graham, we'll move on to, uh, next submitter.
Uh, next submitter is Nicole Miller Hard.
You there, Nicole?
Uh, there we are.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
Nicole, I see your speaker is off.
If you could turn that on. Your mic is off.
If you could turn that on. Um, you have, uh, five minutes
for your, uh, submission.
How you use that time is up to you
and I'll leave it, um, in your hands far away.
Thank you. Hello everyone.
I grew up in Sury, England,
and I, um, spent a lot of time on a farm and I looked
after the pigs there.
They were free roaming pigs.
They were installs by night
and I found them to be incredibly intelligent, curious,
affectionate with each other and with us humans.
I now, for the last 20 years, have had a farm in the bay
of plenty, but my career was in press and photography
and I established a press environmental agency in Sydney,
and I did a lot of stories on
environmental and animal welfare.
One of the stories I was involved in was an expose on
a piggery in Australia.
And I will never ever forget those scenes.
And I commend Lorraine for going into that piggery, um,
and taking the time and the effort to do that
because you're not given red carpet
treatment to go into these places.
You have to try and get in to see what's going on.
And this came to our attention
and what I saw there
was the most horrific scenes I have ever seen in my life.
And I have rescued animals all my life.
The bar baiting the sores on the animals, the distress,
the utter depression.
Uh, most mother pigs go in there
and they're fighting for their lives
to get outta these stalls,
but they get to a point
of total exhaustions when they can't panic anymore.
I saw their feet bleeding
because they were shuffling around so much going backwards
and forwards and banging into the bars.
And these cages were too small for these pigs.
Um, I also saw the piglets. They were no better off.
They were aggressive, they were fighting each other.
They were falling off the teets weaker
ones were pushed aside.
Um, they didn't stand a chance
and there were so many piglets.
The number of piglets per sale was just extraordinary.
Um, and it contrasted so much with my growing up
and seeing how pigs should be taken care of
and how they can be wonderful engaging animals.
Like so many people in this country, I'd like
to see a ban on all crates,
but unfortunately we have to be realistic so
that New Zealand pork industry must move forward at the very
least of freeflowing crates
where there is more normal behavior
and an an humane improvement on the plight of these,
these poor creatures.
The statistics are there.
The mortality of piglets in traditional faring crates are no
less than in free farrowing crates.
There is a higher rate
of stillbirth in traditional farrowing.
Free flowering allows better piglet growth,
more natural behaviors and better survival.
It is well documented that pigs are intelligent.
We've all heard that today as intelligent as chimpanzees
and often outperforming chimpanzees in tests.
They have self-awareness, they have social intelligence,
they have problem solving, they have memory.
Humans share. 95% of pig's, DNA
for this human to see a mother, for this human
to see a mother cow so distressed, not being able to care
for her young, not being able to interact with her young
was just horrific.
I have never seen anything like it
and I've seen quite a lot of animal cruelty.
I think one of the best recommendations that I would like
to leave you with is from an natural pig farmer
who has farmed pigs in traditional crates
that New Zealand is going to push for with this government.
This is what the British pig farmer
said in 2024, just last year.
He said, when the pigs go into the crate, it is
so stressful for them, it's a dead end.
Our first time mothers try to escape and they'll bite
and pour and try to back out.
The pigs become desperate to make a nest.
They rot at the cement, they dig, they have shoulder sores
and infected wounds.
The pigs are bred bigger,
but they don't fit into the crates.
Their heads get stuck pushing cells to have large litters,
way too many piglets.
Pigs damage themselves trying to lie down.
They rip their teeths with their own feet,
they rip their vulvas on the back of the cages.
Piglets can't play with each other.
They get sore knees infected feet
and lameness piglets can be laying on
for a short time and survive.
But the problem is with these traditional sour crates is
that once the sows are down, they don't get up.
They're too exhausted.
It's so uncomfortable, it's so cruel.
Huge litters with weak piglets and pore survival.
And the farmer says this can lose up
to a hundred kilos in three weeks.
They don't eat. They're so stressed.
The farmer says, these crates are not life-saving cradles
like people think they are, and this is where he ends.
I really hope we can move forward from this sort
of barbaric cage.
There are so many better ways with left suffering,
less injuries and less illness.
I don't think putting cells in confinement crates can be
justified anymore.
Thank you Nicole. We've, uh, we're over time,
but I appreciate the efforts that you've made to put in, uh,
written and oral submission
and, um, I wish you all the best for the rest of the day.
Thank you. Thank you. Very powerful. Thank you.
So next committee we have Johnny Walker.
Good afternoon, Johnny.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
I'd like to, um, commend you on your name. It's a good one.
Um, and, uh, you have five minutes to, um,
uh, for your submission
and how you use that time's up to you so far away.
Seems you're on mute. We can't hear you.
Can you hear me now? Uh, yes,
that's much better. Thank you.
Yeah, sorry. There you go. It's hard to go after Nicole.
I think she said it best.
Um, but I'm here today as just, you know, an average Joe
that luckily hasn't seen those sites.
Um, I think if any of you saw those sites, you, you,
we probably wouldn't be here today.
It wouldn't even be a question to be here today.
And I, I hope more people dive into
what she said a little bit deeper.
But yeah, I wrote a quick letter,
so I'll just go through it quickly.
It's not what I actually wrote in I
didn't think would get this far.
So I appreciate people for you guys for having me here,
but, um, yes, I guess I'm an avid animal, avid animal lover,
like the thousands of others who oppose this amendment bill.
But I'm not here today as Adam.
I'm here to be a voice for the voiceless.
I'm here as a voice for what's right
and help you see what's wrong, which in this case is fair
and crates and traditional use of them.
Um, I guess one thing we've learned from history is we've
learned, learned nothing from history.
And I think with, uh,
this government goes back on on our word, it'll,
it'll showcase that, especially
with what's happening around the world.
Um, I hope this is another example of that.
Uh, all my life I've seen amazing campaigns that the likes
of safe, um, SPCA hu are.
And so many other organizations and,
and individuals that are probably here today, um,
have put forward fighting for what's right.
Um, that includes caged, um, eggs, uh, and,
and includes deep sea mining.
Um, all those sorts of stuff
that's happening along our coastlines and with our animals.
Um, we've learned that chickens shouldn't be factory cage
and although their life's, um,
still far from ideal in my eyes,
eyes like everyone else probably submitting this one agrees.
At least we've, you, you know, we've come to an agreement
that their lives deserve to be a little bit better than
what we were we were giving them historically.
I won't talk on, on, on pigs, uh, brains and,
and how developed they're, and how intelligent they're,
and how personable they are.
Um, I know Michael mentioned
that they've probably got a bit sassiness.
I know some do, but I also know a lot of pigs
that are just incredibly infection
and it takes a quick Google
or YouTube search to see that
I'm not gonna ask you to stop eating meat.
I'm not gonna ask you to free the pigs into a big
paddock, although that's what I want.
I know we have to come to a middle ground,
and that's coming from someone
who spent 10 years in the FMCG industry.
Um, I'm still in the FMCG industry
and I know how these businesses work.
I'm asking you gut, what's, what's FMCG
fast moving consumer goods.
I'm asking, um, sorry, I'm asking you
to stick to the, to the word.
Regardless of what government, you or the,
or anyone on the committee falls under Ingrates
and other treatments we currently doing
to our pigs is incredibly cool,
cruel old school and outdated.
If we, if they weren't, we wouldn't be here.
Sweden, the Netherlands, other countries
around the world have already banned them in the UK
and is in the middle of transitioning them out.
And how I say it's a lot of things.
How can we call ourselves clean Green New Zealand if,
if we allow the torture and,
and these ba barbaric traditions to carry on?
I know this business is old money.
Um, there's a lot of people opposing it
for the money reasons, but I think what we, again,
linking back to KDX is we've, we've learned when people have
to adapt, they can adapt quickly.
And this is a prime example of that.
Um, I know many of you, many of you probably here,
I can't see actually any of you really,
but I mean, I know many of you are mothers fathers
and have pets of your own.
Um, and I know you mentioned Steve to, um,
why do we look at pigs differently to dogs?
And I think the, the number one reason for
that is people don't actually see pigs, um,
outta sight, outta mind.
And that's un that's unfortunate case.
And this is no one's stepped foot in the factory,
no one's actually seen what's going on.
Um, or, or, or had had enough of,
of the guts to dive deeper.
Um, all I'll ask, I guess try
and talk as fast as I can is Yeah.
Is that, that people just, yeah, let's, let's stand
for the change that our grandchildren, our children and,
and you know, so many people wanna see.
Let's not let history repeat itself
and let's, um, yeah, let's stop traditional ADEs grow ahead
because I know there's so many other, other things we can do
that, you know, still we create profit for this industry.
And I know Michael actually mentioned that, um,
it actually may bring money into it.
Um, and I agree with that.
Free range eggs and,
and the more traditional that free range eggs go is,
is became more and more profitable.
And I, I actually travel around the country for my business
and I see more and more supermarkets taking on local
free range, traditional free range eggs.
Um, so yeah, I'll leave with that. Thank you.
Thanks very much Johnny.
Uh, we've got time for one quick question if anyone has one.
Just a quick one, Johnny.
Um, yeah, in terms of your, um,
point about the ethics, is your view that if we start from
that perspective as was articulated by, uh, Graham Bull
and Michael Morris, that we will find a way forward in terms
of all the other challenges?
Yeah, I think no one's been challenged or have,
or hasn't been challenged enough to, to find an alternative.
Um, and I think Nicole mentioned it best that, you know,
one small step forward, which is abandoning these,
and there's a small step in my eyes, is a,
a giant step forward for animal rights.
And I, I, I think, yeah, I work with a lot of rescues
around New Zealand and I, I think this is a small step,
but it's, it's a, it's, it's gonna make a big difference.
Um, and yeah, I I, I wish I wasn't even here today
to be honest, because it, it, it, to me,
it's not even an argument.
I it's, and that's not coming from the fact I
haven't needed to meet for 10 years.
It's coming from the fact that it's as simple
as what's right and what's wrong.
Thanks, Johnny. We've, uh, we're over time.
Thank you for taking the time to make a submission, both,
uh, a written, an oral one,
and, uh, hope you have a good de uh, rest of your day.
Thank you. Right committee.
We're moving on now to Alvera domes.
I think that's how it's pronounced.
Um, just waiting for, ah,
welcome to the Primary Productions select committee.
Uh, Vera, I'm not sure if I pronounced your
last name right or not.
Um, uh, you have five minutes.
How you use that time's up to you and the floor is yours.
Thank you Miles and thank you
panel. Can you hear me, Kelly?
Yes, we can. Great.
Thank you. Um, I'm just going
to read through my submission.
There are essentially two types of farmers.
The first type loves the rural life, looking
after the land, the animals and the crops.
They know how to fix fences and tractors
and help animals give birth.
They ensure their farm works as a business.
The second type is mostly profit driven
and will do whatever it takes to maximize profit
and to drive down costs.
Pick farmers who want
to use sour crates belong in the second category.
Metal bud sour crates or cages are designed to confine cells
before and after they give birth.
The justification for these sour crates is it sells are
large animals and they often weigh up
to 200 kgs while newborn piglets weigh under two kgs.
The crates have been used
to apparently prevent piglets being crushed when a sale lies
down or changes position.
But while crates may offer some convenience,
they come at a serious cost to animal welfare.
Pigs as we know in this, um,
I think it was Nicole pointed out,
are highly intelligent social animals in the wild.
A so will build a nest before giving birth.
This can also happen when pigs are allowed
to free range in paddocks and a farrowing crate.
This instinct is completely blocked.
She can't even turn around
and can only take a few steps forward or back.
This lack of space and freedom
to move means the cell is stressed
and cannot interact naturally with the piglets.
There's no room for natural behaviors such
as routine or nesting.
Each time a cell gives birth, she will spend up
to five weeks confined in a crate.
If she has two litters in a year, it's almost a quarter
of her adult life spent in a cage where she can barely move.
There are kind of ways to protect both cells and piglets.
They can be housed in spacious indoor pens with straw
and other nesting materials,
and they can also be kept in outdoor paddocks with access
to dry beded shelters.
This gives the sale freedom to move around
and to care for her piglets and build a nest.
Now there can be some confusion
between farrowing crates used up
to five weeks while a cell gives birth and feeds her piglets
and cell stools, which can find cells
during their entire pregnancy.
And that's almost four months.
They're then moved to farrowing crates for another month.
In other words, they're stuck in there for five months.
South stores have been banned in the UK since 1999.
As far as I'm aware, research has shown
that while crates may reduce some accidental piglet deaths,
the difference is not generally significant compared
to higher and better welfare systems
that allow cells more freedom.
Studies have shown that humans
and pigs have a high degree of genetic sim similarity
with approximately 98%
of the pig genome being similar to the human genome.
It's their common ancestry. That's response. Our, sorry.
It's our common ancestry that's responsible for this,
our ancestry with the pigs.
That is the genetic similarity between humans
and pigs, allows for vi valuable scientific research
and advancements in the understanding
and treatment of human diseases.
The fact that pigs possess similar versions
of genes associated with cardiovascular health
and immune response
and organ development makes pigs valuable in the
study of these topics.
For our medical knowledge,
confining our closely related animal cousins into a small
cage while stopping them from natural,
from having natural behaviors is cruel.
We can, and we should do better than this. Thank you.
Thanks Vera.
Um, do any of the panelists have questions?
Steve? I've got a quick one.
Yeah, I guess over, um, the, our, our wises
and bold decision to get rid of Sal stalls, um,
have in 2016, um,
lead us on a path towards getting rid of the idea
that pigs should be in cages.
And, um, and the anomaly to that is the continued use
of crates, which are the high court ruled in 2020,
should also be got rid of
and wasn't consistent with that animal welfare act.
So would you agree that, um,
this amendment bill, which allows faren crates to be used
for at least another 10 years, and then even still used,
but only, um, slightly changed conditions, um,
is inconsistent with the steps that were taken in 2016
to ban south stalls.
Um, and certainly inconsistent
with the court decision in 2020
that farian crates were inconsistent
with our animal welfare act
and that we should, uh, support the principle
that most New Zealanders seem to hold,
that they don't wanna see mother pigs in cages of any kind.
I totally agree. I, I think, you know,
I think any confinement of any, um, intelligent species,
particularly, you know, the larger animals that,
that we can have as pets and friends
and companions, um, it, it's just, it's beyond understanding
how people can do this to animals.
I, I, I don't get it myself at all,
that anyone can feel okay about walking in
and seeing that pig in agony, stressed to the hilt piglets,
unable to do what they should be doing,
the mother totally unable to do what she should be doing.
It's, it's just completely wrong.
Thanks, Vera. We've come to time or over time. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission
and um, have a happy day. You
Too, Right, team,
we have come to the end.
I don't think, um, we need
to do any consideration in private at all
because we talked about that earlier today.
So my view is, is that we should end the meeting.
Uh, would you be happy with that, Steve?
I agree with that, yeah. Yeah, we had a long deliberation
earlier and, um, I think.